\chapter{Improving the Radial Velocity Precision of HET/HRS}\label{chap:het}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Introduction and Background}

This is about HET/HRS. This will have introduction to HET and HRS.

Motivation behinding using HRS, including its advantages, such as
queque schedule and fiber feed. However, it never performed on 1-2~m/s
level in terms of RV precision like \keck.

Temperature stability in the spectrograph room of \hrs\ was identified
early on as one of the contributing factors to the RV systematic
errors, and this issue was resolved since the installation of a fine
temperature control system in March 2008 (J.~Bean, L.~Ramsey,
P.~McQueen private communications). We confirmed the improvement in RV
precision as a result of this upgrade in our analysis with the HD
37605 data, which is illustrated in the lower panel of
Figure~\ref{het:fig:tempstable}. The RMS of \hrs\ velocities with
respect to the best Keplerian fit of the HD 37605 system is 9 m/s for
data before March 2008, and it is reduced to 6 m/s for data
afterwards. Such improvement is encouraging, and a closer look at the
data and the intermediate products of the Doppler pipeline reveals
even more potential contributors to the RV instability of \hrs, which
is the theme of this chapter.


%----------------------------------------------------------------
% HD 37605 and the improvement on precision brought by temperature stabilization
% plot made by ~/ExoPlanet-2010-2011/Targets/37605/rv_plot/rvplot_NESSF2013.eps
% grabbed from ~/ExoPlanet-2010-2011/Professional_Development/201301-NESSF/proposal/
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[scale=0.5]{het/37605.eps}
\caption{Illustration of the effects of temperature stabilization on
  \het\ RV precision, using data on the HD~37605 system (see
  Chapter~\ref{chap:planets}). The RMS of the RV residuals (bottom
  panel) against the best-fit two-planet Keplerian solution (solid
  line in top panel) has dropped from 9~m/s to 6~m/s (grey areas in
  the bottom plot) after implementation of fine temperature control in
  the spectrograph room in March 2008. The pre-2009 \het\ data are
  provided by the UT Austin group.
\label{het:fig:tempstable}}
\end{figure}
%----------------------------------------------------------------


We set out to first construct a data reduction and RV extraction
pipeline for \het, which is described in
Section~\ref{het:sec:pipeline}. Then we tried to improve the precision
by seeking out for a better instrumental profile (IP) model, i.e., a
functional form that can bring good fit to \het\ data, which is
documented in Section~\ref{het:sec:ip}. Section~\ref{het:sec:fts}
describes our efforts in validating the iodine cell Fourier Transform
Spectrometer (FTS) scans for \het\ and our investigation on the
plausible changes in cell properties.



%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Adoption of REDUCE and the CPS Doppler Code for HET/HRS}\label{het:sec:pipeline}

What we did to modify REDUCE and the CPS Doppler code to get HET working.

We modified the REDUCE reduction routines built by Dr.\ Sara Gettle
and Dr.\ Steve Bongiono for raw spectral data reduction. The most
important modification was to automate the routine for tracing the
echelle orders on the spectral image, which used to require
human-intervention (i.e., clicking on the echelle orders to help the
code recognize the traces). I also wrote wrapper routines to automate
patch reduction for \het\ observation programs or any single target
star.

In terms of adapting the CPS Doppler code, it was mostly for training
the code to recognize \het\ images, to work with our local file
structures, and to be able to produce DSST locally using \het\ data
(instead of using \keck\ DSST like we did initially, which does not
produce RVs as precise as using \het\ DSSTs).



%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{The Search for a Better Instrumental Profile}\label{het:sec:ip}

\input{het-ip.tex}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Investigation on the Iodine Cell and the Iodine Atlases}\label{het:sec:fts}

\input{het-fts.tex}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%\section{The Investigation on Modal Noise}
 

 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Conclusion and Future Work}\label{het:sec:conclusion}
 
To summarize, we think that two of the major drivers behind \het's RV
systematic errors are temperature stabilization issues with the iodine
cell (or inaccurate iodine atlas which fails to capture such changes)
and inaccurate modeling of the IPs. We have laid foundations for
solving these two problems, and it is promising that future work may
bring the $>$10-year worth of \het\ archival RV data to a higher RV
precision, hopefully much similar to \keck's.

%----------------------------------------------------------------
% Chunk pixel flux variation comparison between Keck and HET
% plot made by
% ~/ExoPlanet-2010-2011/HET-HRS-IP/05-Iodine_FTS_investigation/chunk_variation/chunk_vary.pro
% and plot_chunk_vary.pro and saved therein
\begin{figure}
\centering
\subfloat{\includegraphics[scale=0.35]{het/het_chunk_variation.eps}}
\subfloat{\includegraphics[scale=0.35]{het/keck_chunk_variation.eps}}\
\subfloat{\includegraphics[scale=0.35]{het/line_spec_rms_keck_het.eps}}
\caption{Comparison between the amounts of variation in a spectral
chunk in $\sim 500$ \het\ and \keck\ lamp iodine observations,
respectively. The top two panels show the overplotted spectra in this
chunk, shifted and normalized so that the spectral lines match (using
cross correlation and interpolation; normalized using total counts in
this chunk). The black dots in each of the two top panels are the RMS
values of the normalized counts in each pixel, multiplied by 4 and
added by 0.5 for illustration purposes. The \het\ spectra exhibit
significantly more variation than the \keck\ spectra, and we discuss
potential reasons in Section~\ref{het:sec:conclusion}. The bottom
panel is ploting the pixel counts RMS as a function of the derivative
of the spectrum, which shows that the \het\ spectra have more
variation in both line centers/continuum and line wings than \keck.
\label{het:fig:chunkvary}}
\end{figure}
%----------------------------------------------------------------

Our adventure in improving the RV precision of \het, though incomplete
and sometimes inconclusive so far, have taught us several important
lessons for iodine-calibrated precise RV work:

\begin{itemize}
  \item The IP functional forms for fiber-fed spectrographs probably
differ quite significantly from slit-fed ones, and it is important to
find a good IP function which not only describes the IP well but also
has good convergence properties for the forward modeling.
fitter. Initial guesses on IP parameters could play an important role.
  \item The iodine atlas provided by FTS scans should not be taken for
granted as the ``ground truth''. There are challenges with FTS
measurements and data reduction for measuring absorption spectrum with
such a big spectral span. The cell can also change over time, nulling
any old FTS scans. Echelle spectrograph with hyper resolution like the
TS12 arm on the Tull Spectrograph is very helpful for validating
iodine atlas or checking cell quality.
  \item It is vital to stabilize the cell to a desired temperature
precicely and accurately, probably at least to
$\pm$10$\degree$C. Theoretical code computing iodine lines such as
IodineSpec5 is helpful for diagnosing problems with iodine cells. One
can imagine that this can also be helpful in identifying permanent
cell change like the one experienced by the Lick/Hamilton cell, which
compromised the usefulness of the spectrograph for precise RV work
fatally.
\end{itemize}

Looking forward, there are several things which can help solving the
mystery and hopefully eventually leading to an improvement in the RV
precision of \het:

{\bf (1) Adding temperature as a free parameter} when fitting
\het\ data to extract RVs. The effectiveness of this approach can
first be tested through fitting B star $+$ iodine frames. 

{\bf (2) Finding a better IP function:} This can be first done
through fitting ThAr frames, and then tested via fitting B star $+$
iodine frames, which would be simultaneous with fitting for the cell
temperature (inconvenient but necessary, because it is almost
impossible to disentangle the two). 

{\bf (3) Examining the spectral data for modal noise or raw reduction
errors:} We have taken day time engineering data before the HET
shutdown/upgrade to test if modal noise is significant in \het\
data. Although we have calculated that the number of modes in the
\het\ fiber is large enough that modal noise should not be a concern,
it would still be valuable to reduce and analyze these data to prove
this hypothesis.

More importantly, the upgraded \het\ has great promise in RV
precision, and carrying on these lessons is crucial for ensuring good
RV performance ($\sim$1~m/s). Chapter~\ref{chap:conclusion} has more
the upgraded \het\ and related future work.



