\chapter{Improving the Radial Velocity Precision of Keck/HIRES}\label{chap:keck}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Introduction and Background}

The Keck telescopes are two 10-m telescopes on the mountain of Mauna
Kea in Hawaii at the Keck Observatory, which is operated by the
University of California and financially supported by the W.\ M.\ Keck
Foundation. Precise Doppler observations are made through the HIRES
spectrometer \citep{1994SPIE.2198..362V} on the Keck I telescope,
which has a long and glorious history in exoplanet discoveries (see
Chapter~\ref{chap:introduction}). Just like \het, the precise RV
observations are calibrated by an iodine cell. The typical resolution
for RV frames is chosen to be $R=55,000$ with the B5 decker on the
slit plate, which is also tall enough to provide good sky subtraction
(for more details, see \citealt{2009ApJ...696...75H} and
\citealt{2009ApJ...702..989V}). \keck\ is known as the most precise RV
instrument on a 10-meter class telescope, with a stunning long-term RV
precision of 1-2 m/s.

Penn State does not have any private share of \keck\ time, but we are
part of the California Planet Survey group which regularly conducts RV
surveys using \keck\ for about 30 nights a year or more (especially
for \kepler\ follow-up programs). As a result, we have made joint
discoveries using \keck\ and \het\ RVs (e.g.,
Chapter~\ref{chap:planets}) and have access to all the data and
extracted RVs on the standard stars such as HD 185144 and HD 10700.

My work on \keck\ started by accident. As we were investigating the
causes behind \het's RV systematics, we regularly compared \keck\
performance on HD 185144 or iodine frames with \het. When we were
looking into the quality of \het's iodine atlas and studying the
potential effects of its ``wrong'' wavelength solution, I spotted a
strong correlation between the RVs reported by a spectral chunk and
its wavelength in the \keck\ data. The chunk RVs and their wavelengths
seem to have a linear correlation whose slopes varied from observation
to observation but with a zero point all anchored at around 5200\AA,
with the redder region near 6000\AA\ exhibiting the largest
scatter. My thesis advisor, Jason Wright, quickly suggested that this
could be due to telluric lines in the spectrum, because there are more
telluric lines in the red and the 5200\AA\ region is relatively free
of tellurics. Indeed, we saw strong correlations between RVs and the
barycentric velocity correction (BCs) -- a smoking gun signature for
RV systematics -- for telluric contaminated chunks. Perhaps this is
the culprit behind the long-known RV-BC correlation in the data of HD
185144 (Figure~\ref{keck:fig:sigdra})? Hoping that eliminating this
(more or less) long ignored spectral contamination source would bring
visible improvements to \keck\ RV precision, we began our
investigation on the effects of telluric contamination in \keck\ data,
which subsequently lead to the other works in this
Chapter.\footnote{As it later turned out, the correlation between the
chunk RVs and wavelengths are neither due to telluric contamination
nor the wavelength errors in the iodine atlas (though it could have
such an effect, but hard to imagine at the magnitude we saw). It is
purely because that I had chosen to perform a weighted least-$\chi^2$
fit for the linear correlation between RVs and wavelengths, but I had
used the wrong weights. Instead of using the weights empirically
derived by vanking, I was using the analytical weights calculated
following \cite{butler1996}. Because there is no such real
correlation between RVs and wavelengths, the ``correlation'' I saw or
fitted for was merely reflecting the facts that there are more stellar
lines in some region of the spectrum than others, and the region near
5200\AA\ receives the highest weight.}
 
%----------------------------------------------------------------
% sig Dra RV BC
% plot made by ~/Exo.../Keck/plots_general/basic_rv.pro and saved in basic_rv/
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[scale=0.32]{keck/185144_RV_BC.eps}
\caption{\keck\ RV vs. BC for HD 185144, an RV standard star. The
strong correlation between velocities and the barycentric velocity of
the star indicates RV systematic errors that are not intrinsic to the
star. This is because the barycentric motion of the Earth is the
dominant source of redshifts of stellar lines as Earth moves at a
large speed of up to 30 km/s relative to the star. As the stellar
lines move back and forth annually through the iodine lines, any
systematic errors will manifest as correlations between RV and BC.
\label{keck:fig:sigdra}}
\end{figure}
%----------------------------------------------------------------

The data we used for this Chapter are kindly provided by the CPS
group, in particular, Andrew Howard and Howard Isaacson. 


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Effects of Telluric Contamination and
  Remedies}\label{keck:sec:telluric} 

\input{telluric.tex}




%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Errors Induced by Imperfect Stellar Reference Spectra}\label{keck:sec:dsst}

\input{keck-dsst.tex}


%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Numerical and Algorithmic Errors}\label{keck:sec:algorithm}

Solving the least-$\chi^2$ problem in a multi-dimensional, multi-modal
setting is not easy. Efficient as it might be in terms of
computational time, the least-$\chi^2$ algorithm employed by the CPS
Doppler code could give a biased solution and comprise the RV precision
and accuracy. We performed simulations to probe the magnitude of such
errors.

Figure~\ref{keck:fig:algorithm} illustrates the RV scatter and RV-BC
trends induced by algorithmic errors -- the RVs plotted are from
simulations with no photon noise added, using the exact input spectrum
as the DSST, and the exact simple Gaussian IPs as the input. A perfect
algorithm should return all zeros for the RV, which is not the case
here. To probe the origin of this algorithmic errors a bit further, we
have run three sets of simulations at three different spectral
resolution (i.e., using different Gaussian IP widths). The amplitude
of the RV scatter decreases as the resolution increases, which is as
expected because shallower spectral lines probably translate to
shallower $\chi^2$ surfaces. However, the signature period or
length scale (in BC space) of the RV-BC trend does not change, which
is about 8~km/s or 6 pixels on the CCD. We are still investigating the
origin of this signature length scale (perhaps its in the blaze
normalization, or interpolation or rebinning algorithms, to name a
couple). The dichotomy in the red points (the fact that they split
into two RV groups) is probably due to the convergence criteria (which
are tuned for \keck\ resolution, and not sufficient for significantly
higher ones) and the algorithm's sensitivity in initial guesses. One
caveat is that because the IPs were fixed in the Doppler code run for
these simulations, the fitter only went through one pass (three free
parameters) instead of the standard two passes, where in the final
pass the wavelength dispersion scale is fixed. We will investigate
whether is this the major cause of algorithmic errors shown in
Figure~\ref{keck:fig:algorithm}. 


%----------------------------------------------------------------
% Plot showing algorithmic errors
% made by ~/Exo../Keck../simulate.../msplot.pro, in /msplot/.
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[scale=0.65]{telluric/185144-rv-bc-rja01-rje01-rjf01.eps} 
\caption{RV vs.\ BC for HD 185144, for simulations with fixed simple
IPs and no photon noise added. The data plotted here are from
simulated spectral data with different IP widths (or spectral
resolution, $\sigma=1.7$ pixels corresponds to original \keck\
resolution). The origins of the RV scatters and trends in these plots
are purely algorithmic.
\label{keck:fig:algorithm}}
\end{figure}
%----------------------------------------------------------------

Figure~\ref{telluric:fig:chunkalgorithm} shows an example chunk with
visible algorithmic errors. Again the top panel is showing real data,
and the bottom one is the simulated data (with photon noise and
complex IPs). This is a severe case, because its a chunk near 5900\AA\
which does not contain a large number of stellar or iodine lines, and
therefore it is particularly challenging for the algorithm to find a
good $\chi^2$ minimum.

Unfortunately it is hard to quantify how much RV RMS the algorithmic
errors add to the RV budget, because the major damage comes from the
biases instead of the increased scatter (and the ``vanking'' procedure
breaks down because of this, unable to weigh the chunks effectively
and improve the precision). Figure~\ref{keck:fig:algorithm} suggests
that it can lead to spurious signals with considerable amplitude (1-3
m/s) for high SNR observations (the simulated observations here
essentially have infinitely SNR).


%----------------------------------------------------------------
% Chunk Plot showing algorithmic errors
% made by ~/Exo../Keck../simulate.../msplot.pro, in /msplot/.
\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[scale=0.5]{keck/chunkcomp-algorithm.eps} 
\caption{Real (top) or simulated (bottom) Keck RVs from a 2\AA\ chunk
from HD 185144 spectra showing RV systematic errors caused by
algorithmic errors. The RVs in the bottom panel are from the
simulations with complex IPs and photon noise.
\label{telluric:fig:chunkalgorithm}}
\end{figure}
%----------------------------------------------------------------


To list a few places in the Doppler code which may cause significant
numerical and algorithmic errors (not in any particular order): 
\begin{itemize}
\item The LM least-$\chi^2$ fitter: it can get stuck in local
  minima, and it may have reached the crude convergence criteria but not
  actually converged, and it is extremely sensitive to initial guesses.
\item The interpolation algorithm for interpolating or rebinning the model
  spectra. The current interpolater does not seem to make an effort at
  conserving flux, for example. 
\item The simple linear fit to the blaze function in each chunk (each
  chunk contains 80 pixels).
\item ``Vanking'', or the final statistical weighting process, only
  takes into account RV scatter of each chunk but not biases.
\end{itemize}

Overall, it is not surprising at all that this decade-old Doppler code
fails to deliver precise RVs to the modern era standard. We discuss
the paths forward in Chapter~\ref{chap:conclusion}.



%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\section{Conclusions and Future Work}\label{keck:sec:conclusion}

In this chapter, we described our work on discovering and
characterizing three RV systematic error sources for \keck: telluric
contamination, errors in the DSST, and algorithmic errors. 

Telluric contamination, and in particular, micro-telluric lines, has a
small but non-negligible effects on the RV precision and accuracy. For
a typical G type star like the ones targeted by CPS, micro-tellurics
adds $\sim 0.6$~m/s to the RV error budget (in quadrature) and also a
spurious signal with an amplitude on the order of 10-20~cm/s if left
untreated. We have summarized the best strategies for treating
micro-telluric lines for precise RV using iodine calibrators in
Section~\ref{keck:sec:telluric}, which are masking deep lines,
cleaning DSST, forward modeling the telluric lines in RV extraction,
and assigning lower statistical weights to telluric-contaminated
chunks.

Errors in the DSSTs are one of current major RV systematic sources in
\keck\ RV data, and quite likely the largest one. It adds 1 m/s to the
RV error budget and creates a spurious signal with amplitude $\sim$ 1
m/s. RV-BC trends in simulated data match the ones seen in the
observed spectra among many spectral chunks, which pinned down this
source of error unambiguously. 

Algorithmic errors contribute a considerable amount to the current
\keck\ RV budget as well, and it is hard to imagine it would deliver
sub-m/s precision. After all, it is extremely challenging to find a
$\chi^2$ minimum on a complex surface with 15 dimensions (parameters)
using spectral data with 80 points (80 pixels per chunk) and
highly covariant model parameters. 

In terms of future work along these lines:

{\bf (1) Continuing the battle with telluric contamination: } We plan
to run simulations on an M star, HD 95735, also an RV standard. M stars
are particularly interesting because they may be more susceptible to
telluric contamination -- they have more stellar lines in the red
where the telluric lines are denser. We also plan to implement full
forward-modeling of telluric lines in real data reduction (as opposed
to our toy modeling with fixed water column density for all
dates/observations), and find out whether a priori or floating water
column density parameter works better. We plan to improve the DSST
cleaning process by incorporating forward modeling of telluric lines
in the ``piston Gaussians deconvolver'' that is currently used for
making DSST, instead of dividing them out. We hope to implement our
telluric correction package into the official CPS pipeline eventually,
which will be busily processing \keck\ follow-up data on TESS targets
(many M dwarfs, undoubtedly) in the near future.

{\bf (2) Searching for a better DSST fabrication method: } We will
diagnose the origin of the DSST errors while searching for a better
deconvolution algorithm. It is possible that the current CPS
``deconvolution'' algorithm described in Section~\ref{keck:sec:dsst}
is sufficient, but the problem is in the normalization or some other
parts of the process. Nonetheless, it could be rewarding to jump out
of the current frame work and try another completely different
approach (e.g., constructing DSST from all the star$+$iodine frames,
which has been attempted by Andrew Vanderberg and John Johnson).

{\bf (3) Eliminating the numerical and algorithmic errors: } The CPS
Doppler code can certainly use an upgrade. However, in order to
eliminate a large portion of the algorithmic errors we are seeing now,
it probably means major structural changes to this lengthy and complex
legacy code written for early-1990 computers, regardless whether one
would like to stick with the L-M least-$\chi^2$ fitter. Therefore,
instead, I am building a new RV extraction code from scratch, using
Python and modern algorithms, which is one of the topics in
Chapter~\ref{chap:conclusion}.



